
# Ceasefires

The present system was designed to assist human coders in creating a dataset of
ceasefires, by performing a "first pass" over raw text material, indicating
what material is interesting to coders. The collection of data about ceasefires
was motivated by a perhaps surprising lack of systematic knowledge about
ceasefires, which despite this are often part of peace processes and conflict
migitation work. 

What is the effect of a ceasefire on a conflict? Do ceasefires facilitate
further peaceful development, or are they detrimental to the prospect of
lasting peace? Such stark contrast between competing, equally plausible
hypotheses is testament to the lack of empirical validation of theories about
ceasefires. This chapter outlines the ceasefire knowledge gap, and the way data
production can contribute towards shedding light on the phenomenon.

The collection of new data drives theory development, a fact that has perhaps
been underappreciated [@gleditsch_data_2014 301]. Theory might proceed beyond
the bounds of what has been, and can practically be observed, spurring further
development beyond what is currently known, but any theory must eventually
stand up to empirical scrutiny. This is only possible, after systematically and
mindfully collecting data. which is the foundational material with which
theories can be made robust and trustworthy. 

The serious nature of the context in which ceasefires exist makes it important
to ensure reliable and valid data.  While these qualities are always important,
when the represented phenomenon affects human lives in such serious ways, its
importance increases exponentially [@russett_note_1977 95].  This is obviously
the case when collecting data about any kind of phenomenon relating to violent
conflict. This is also true of ceasefires, that have the potential to save many
lives, but might also prolong and exacerbate conflict.

Getting ceasefires right, both in terms of timing, talks and treaties, is
vital. Therefore, understanding ceasefires, and consequently collecting
high-quality data on ceasefires is an important task.  In this chapter, i give
a brief overview of the theoretical context of ceasefires, showing how the data
that might result from the present work might contribute towards solving an
urgent knowledge deficiency.

## Ending Conflict 

The study of conflict, specifically ending conflict, forms the theoretical
backdrop of the work presented here. Conflict research is both the motivation
for-, and the domain in which the data collection tool presented in the
following chapter is situtated. To provide some context, i will first give a
brief overview of the context of research on ending conflict, and how this
relates to ceasefires. 

Conflict arises when two parties are unable or unwilling to share a scarce
resource.  In this view, paraphrasing Clausewitz, violent conflict is indeed a
continuation of politics by other means, a way of negotiating using the
language of violence rather than words. The competing claim to the resource,
which might be called an "incompatibility" [@wallensteen_understanding_2012
15], lies at the heart of conflict, while its manifestation is violent action
directed towards resolving the incompatibility in favor of either of the
parties. 

Bartering with weapons rather than words is almost always an inefficient way of
achieving gains due to the extremely high costs of war
[@fearon_rationalist_1995 383]. Thus, prospects for negotiated peace should be
present in almost any case. Central challenges to negotiations, however,
include mutual distrust and suspicion, and faulty calculations about the
prospects of military gain. 

While decisive victory used to be the most predominant reason for conflict
termination, it has been surpassed by other ways of ending conflict, and is now
the least common category [@kreutz_how_2010 246]. This increase in peace
agreements and ceasefires, negotiated endings, as a way of ending conflict
makes it important to understand them. 

At least in the case of civil wars, the way in which the war ends "greatly
influences the duration of postwar peace" [@mason_when_2011 173] due to how
different arrangements affect the post-war balance between the actors, and the
desire to attain sovereignty (ibid.). A conflict is resolved when the parties
to the conflict agree to a solution to their incompatibility, accept each
other's continued existence as parties, and cease to use violent action as a
means of negotiation [@wallensteen_understanding_2012 8]. In other words,
conflict resolution involves a successful negotiation of terms that satisfy
parties in the incompatible issue area. While victory and capitulation also end
conflict, they do not necessarily resolve it. 

Conflict resolution spans between a narrow and a broad conceptualization of
peace; in the narrowest sense, conflict resolution is about ending violence,
while in the broader sense, conflict resolution is also about creating justice
(ibid.  11). This points towards the fact that resolving conflict does not
simply mean ending it, but addressing issues and grievances, creating space for
co-habitation between warring parties and securing the satisfaction with peace,
compared with the prospects of war.  Thus, while the end of violent action is a
prerequisite for conflict resolution, it is not sufficient
[@wallensteen_understanding_2012 10]. 

The end of violent action can be brought about by a formal treaty, termed a
ceasefire, defined as "an agreement between all of the main actors in a
conflict that terminates military operations" [@kreutz_how_2010 p. 245].  This
is a prerequisite for traditional peacekeeping [@bellamy_understanding_2010
173], which is primarily focused on the cessation of violence and the
facilitation of talks initiated by the parties themselves.  The cessation of
violence is obviously the most important part of conflict resolution
[@wallensteen_understanding_2012 9]. A point of contention, however, is whether
or not it is positive for the long-term prospects of peace,  if a ceasefire
precedes a more comprehensive, issue-resolving agreement between the parties.

A conflict with a ceasefire, but no issue resolution, might be called "frozen",
in the sense that they are halted, but not resolved. Several "Frozen" conflicts
attest to the persistence of issues that remain unsolved: DMZ lines separating
warring parties, like in Cyprus and Korea, hold violence at bay, but might
cement the dividing line between parties, certainly not facilitating
negotiations and proper action towards solving the underlying incompatibility.

When talking about active involvement in ending conflict, it might be fruitful
to distinguish between the concepts of conflict management and conflict
resolution [@wallensteen_understanding_2012 9]. While managing a conflict by
controlling the acts that constitute it might be both practically and morally
necessary in many cases, management and resolution are not the same. While
a conflict ends when it is resolved, and is thus managed, managing it does not
necessarily mean that it is resolved. An interesting question thus becomes: How
effective is conflict management, in a given case, in creating conflict
resolution? In terms of interventions; when is it best to intervene, either to
create lasting peace, or even just to avoid short-term atrocities?

Much scholarly attention has been given to the issue of how to understand the
formulation and negotiation of claims on the part of the actors [notably
@fearon_rationalist_1995], while the effect and importance of simply ending the
violence is more unclear. Many apparently have "strong opinions"
[@wallensteen_understanding_2012 45] about the merits of ceasefires, but a lack
of empirical studies make them a persistently opaque phenomenon (ibid.). 

Studying the "freezing" of conflict, simply committing to non-violent means
while the cause for conflict remains is also an interesting case for
understanding what essentially drives conflict; is it enough to simply handle
the "symptom" of violence, or will the underlying "illness" of incompatibility
manifest itself when ceasefires expire, are broken or declared void? While
concrete actions constitute the conflict, some argue that they cannot be the
sole focus if seeking a lasting resolution (ibid. 15). 

## Argument for ceasefires

There are several plausible arguments for why a ceasefire is an integral to
building lasting peace. Achieving and enforcing a ceasefire halts the
accumulation of further grief, makes the premises for further negotiation
static and clear, and facilitates the inclusion of unarmed groups, which might
be important actors when trying to reconcile and rebuild social trust. 

Firstly, ceasefires are desirable for an obvious reason: They prevent further
bloodshed and violence, saving lives and preventing devastation. While a mere
ceasefire does not address the causes underlying the conflict, waiting for the
issues to be resolved before stopping the violence might be morally
unsustainable. It might take a long time before parties reach an agreement
[@mahieu_when_2007 209]; this period of violence might take a serious toll on
the people affected by the conflict. 

Secondly, ceasefires "lock" the conflict situation, making further gains or
losses in using violent means impossible. This perhaps improves the prospects
of negotiations, as the terms for negotiation are made less unpredictable: With
a ceasefire, dramatic military gains cannot affect talks, which can proceed on
clear terms. Clear public information reduces the probability of further
violent action between two rational actors [@fearon_rationalist_1995 392], as
the "transaction cost" of obtaining something through conflict is very high.
Although ceasefires might provide clearer public information, however, they do
not guarantee that furtive parties might still withhold information both about
their capabilities, and their intent.

Thirdly, it is argued that the inclusion of non-armed groups in a
peace-building process is much less likely before a ceasefire is in place
[@wallensteen_understanding_2012]. The violence deters anyone but those
prepared to fight to resolve issues, which in turn demonstrably reduces the
prospects for building robust peace (ibid.).

Fourth, unilateral ceasefires might be seen as signals of positive intent.
Communication between parties through this kind of signaling is important for
conflict resolution, because it can reduce mutual uncertainty. The more
"costly" signals are, the more sincere they appear, and the stronger the effect
[@fortna_scraps_2003 344]. Unilateral ceasefires show good will, perhaps also
strength. Parties that announce that they do not have to fight desperately in
order to win appear more amicable. Signaling that one is willing to forfeit
further military gains, even exposing oneself to surprise attack, is surely
costly enough to affect mutual trust positively. 

## Argument against ceasefires 

While the immediate positive effect of a ceasefire gives a powerful incentive
towards attaining and maintaining ceasefire in a conflict situation, conflicts
are, as briefly discussed here, very complex processes. Balancing the short and
long-term gains in terms of reconciliation and peace is important when seeking
conflict-resolution, which makes it important to carefully assess the actions
taken to establish peace. 

Contrasted with sincere attempts at attaining lasting peace, the concept of
"tactical pause" [@milton-edwards_warriors_2017 213] refers to a ceasefire
based on tactical concerns, rather than a desire for further peace-building.
The potential for ceasefires to be peace measures in disguise make them an
ambiguous phenomenon. @mahieu_when_2007 (217) goes as far as to claim that he
was unable to find only one case in which preliminary ceasefires were not
"exploited by the parties to increase their preparedness for war".

Tactical ceasefires are driven by the interests of the military parties, to
achieve zero-sum gains. If parties become militarily exhausted, and a stalemate
is reached in the fighting, they might seek a ceasefire in order to recuperate
and rearm [@wallensteen_understanding_2012 45], and adjust strategies and
tactics in relative peace [@schoon_why_2018 492]. Importantly, while these
pauses might provide much-wanted relief for the civilian population, the
recuperated and rearmed warriors might return in force, causing much greater
damage over the long run. Both decisive victory and holding out for  parties to
concede to negotiations, while being costly in the short term, removes the
possibility of this kind of rearmed resurgence. The extension of conflict,
increasing the overall toll of death and destruction [@mahieu_when_2007 216],
is important to avoid, but hard to anticipate.

A ceasefire becomes a kind of prisoners' dilemma, where both parties have
incentive to defect (rearm and prepare for more conflict), but neither want
both to defect as war is very costly. If they believe that sincere negotiations
cannot provide them with the outcome they desire, or that the other party is
likely in the process of "defecting", however, the chance of defection is high,
as shown by [@mahieu_when_2007 217]. @fearon_rationalist_1995 emphasizes the
importance of this uncertainty, which arises when "one or more [parties] would
have an incentive to renege on the terms" of an agreement for their own
benefit. 

## Resolving the argument 

So it stands that there are at least two plausible-sounding arguments about how
ceasefires affect conflict. How do we determine which one is correct? Since all
of these arguments can be formulated as falsifiable hypotheses, the answer is,
of course, observing real ceasefires, and their effect on conflict. 

What kinds of actors exploit ceasefires, and what kinds are more likely to be
sincere in the pursuit of peace? Are there ways to tailor ceasefire
interventions to specific conflict situations, factoring in the configuration
of actors, their prospects, the conflict history, the development in the short
and long term, and so on? These are all relevant questions for intevening
parties seeking to establish peace [@mahieu_when_2007 207].

By using granular, high quality data, it might be possible to answer these
questions with some degree of confidence. Indeed, data collection must
necessarily precede any serious effort to give general answers to these
questions [@leng_toward_1977 92].  The premise of data, given facts, lies at
the base of any meaningful argument.  While speculation, thinking that is based
on logical deduction, is also a meaningful activity, at the end of the chain of
deduction from which the argument proceeds must be some reference to the
empirical world for the resulting argument to be interesting. 

Data volume is desirable, as non-determinate interrelations can only be
approximately observed through statistics performed on large numbers of cases.
As a general rule, the less determinate the phenomena, the more data is needed
[@richardson_statistics_1960 xvii]. Useful data is not abundant, however. This
is caused by multiple factors: Firstly, finding reliable documents and facts
about war and conflict has always been very difficult. Large, complex and
willfully opaque processes such as war will never become "favorable to the
compilation of statistics" [@dumas_losses_1923 21]. Secondly, gathering
high-quality data is a costly and difficult process. 

War and conflict are certainly not simple determinate processes.
@morgenthau_politics_1948 [23] sardonically remarks that the empirical study of
processes that are as complex as war and conflict is forfeit; there are simply
too many factors that influence outcomes, making the search for an objective,
empirical science of war a fool's errand. This might be and overly pessimistic
outlook today, however, as more and more raw data is being made available, and
computerization is aiding researchers in gathering data.

### Gathering data

The development of new sources of data is a very important factor furthering
the development of theory: New data broadens the range of testable hypotheses
[@salehyan_best_2015 105], and spurs the development of theory in the wake of
either refutative or confirmatory observation [@gleditsch_data_2014 301]. 

A salient example of this has been the development of the "tactical
perspective" (ibid. 308) on civil war [@buhaug_geography_2002]. The correlation
between geographically and temporally localized factors, such as natural
resources, terrain and demographics and the outbreak of civil war is theorized,
and partly demonstrated. However, the authors note that a strongly expected
correlation, between rough terrain and conflict scope was not observed, likely
because of "poor data" (ibid. 430). Further development of theory connecting
localized factors with conflict patterns has been linked with the development
of disaggregated event-data [@raleigh_geographies_2015 87]. 

The perspectives on ceasefires discussed above indicate that there is a complex
relationship between ceasefires and the conflict dynamic. The nature of this
relationship, however, cannot be discerned without first making systematic
observations, preferably of many cases of ceasefire. However, ceasefires have
not yet been studied on the scale necessary for making robust inferences.
Compiling data about ceasefires is a fundamentally important step towards
better knowledge about them.

### Challenge

If it is so important, why has data about ceasefires not already been created?
This relates to two important facts about data creation: It is an expensive,
and difficult process. As mentioned, data quality is paramount in such
important contexts, but achieving good quality is extremely difficult, for
several reasons. Frustratingly, data quality and cost are often mutually
exclusive: To produce data of sufficient quality, more resources are needed in
terms of hours spent coding, or spent developing useful tools and techniques. 

Quality data relating to many interesting phenomena is, therefore, a scarce
resource, a fact that determines the scope of scientific inquiry. This makes
the development of techniques to remedy these two problems important, and is
the motivation behind the work presented here. 

How can the collection of data about ceasefires be improved by computerization?
In the following chapters, i describe part of a pipeline through which raw
information is transformed into data about ceasefires. The fact that this data
does not already exist is testament to the great difficulty of conceiving and
creating such data, as it is obviously needed, and would be a great boon for
further development of theory surrounding the phenomenon. 

