
# Ceasefires

A ceasefire is "an agreement between all of the main actors in a conflict that
terminates military operations" [@kreutz_how_2010 p. 245]. A conflict, defined
here as an ongoing violent process, wherein two groups attempt to resolve
a real or imagined incompatibility, is thus half-solved. The incompatibility
remains, but the violence stops.

How does a ceasefire affect an ongoing war? Is the effect dependent on certain
circumstances, or a certain way of designing or implementing the ceasefire? Do
ceasefire agreements actually end violence, and do they affect the long-term
prospects of violence in a conflict area? Preliminary research indicates that
ceasefires might serve several purposes, depending on the conflict context.
A ceasefire might express genuine intent to end a conflict, and move towards
peace, but a ceasefire might also be used strategically, to gain time to
regroup or rearm [@schoon_why_2018 491]

This indicates that there is a complex relationship between ceasefires and the
conflict dynamic. The nature of this relationship, however, cannot be discerned
without first making systematic observations, preferably of many cases of
ceasefire. However, ceasefires have not yet been studied on the scale necessary
for making robust inferences. Compiling data about ceasefires is
a fundamentally important step towards better knowledge about them.

## Event data

Before considering how to collect the relevant data, it is important to
determine what one is actually trying to observe. Among the myriad facts of the
world, some must be selected as indicative of the relevant concept. This fact
selection follows necessarily from the theoretical framework in which the
data-making process is embedded: The way in which a concept is formulated
determines what it is necessary to observe, in order to infer that a concept is
"present" in a given observation.

The work presented here is done within the "event-data tradition", building on the
work of pioneering authors such as Charles McClelland and Edward Azar. Before
1950, international relations was focused on attitudes and perceptions of
nations, and work was focused on developing "grand, sweeping theories" about
their behaviour. The middle and late 1950s, however, saw a shift in focus
towards "the actual behaviour of nations" [@azar_preface_1975 ix]. The
production and analysis of data about such behaviour was pioneered by Charles
McClelland (ibid.).

McClellands foundational insight was that international processes might best be
understood by observing the actions of involved actors. This is based on
a theory of what creates international behaviour, which according to McClelland
is affected by three sources: Traits and characteristics of the participating
actors, effects produced by their contacts and interactions, and environmental
factors, external to the international system [@mcclelland_acute_1961 194].
This theory of international behaviour mandates the collection and analysis of
data about actions and events in the international system, as it can only be
understood by considering preceding acts and events. 

An event is the basic unit of observation, through which things are
conceptualized [@king_event_1989]. A most basic statement of what an event is,
is that it is "something that happens" [@strand_reassessing_2006 7].  By
looking at patterns in sets of related events, inferences can be made, linking
events together to form accounts of processes or states. 

In these terms, a ceasefire is thought of as a state, with events demarcating
it. Thus, the operational definition of a ceasefire is given in terms of
relevant constituent events. On the one hand a ceasefire is agreed upon and
declared, and on the other hand, a ceasefire is broken or declared void. This
"de-jure" conception should perhaps be critically compared to the "de-facto"
state of ceasefire, expressed in terms of violent acts and casualties.
Determining the relationship between these presumably linked states, however,
is not possible without first gathering data about the events that constitute
them. Therefore, i choose to focus on the operationalization and coding of
de-jure ceasefires, in terms of declaration events. 

## Hierarchy of theory

In many cases, gathering event data is almost prohibitively impractical. In the
case of a large, complex process such as a war or conflict, the relevant events
are extremely numerous, and will require substantial investments in time and
resources to collect. In addition, the processes, rather than the events
themselves, are the objects of study [@king_event_1989 124]: Conflict scholars
are more interested in determining what affects the process of conflict, rather
than what affects or follows from a single casualty. Why then attempt to gather
data about events? 

A salient reason for focusing on event data rather than available composite
data, however, is given by @leng_toward_1977. He writes that "[d]ata should be
as [...] granular as possible. This ensures that researchers are not guided too
firmly by the biases of the collectors" (74). In this case, the biases refer to
theoretical orientations, that are, as mentioned above, preconditional for data
gathering. 

The idea of granular data being less laden with theory than what can be thought
of as "composite" data relates to the fact that any summarization or grouping
of facts to form a composite observation "inherits" the theoretical assumptions
of the parts. In this sense, data can be said to exist in a hierarchical
relationship, with data made with other points of data requiring more
assumption when using it for further analysis.

"
Any constructed typology is unavoidably a reflection of the investigator's understanding of the nature of the phenomena being observed and classified, and his research objectives.
" 74 @leng_toward_1977

A good illustration of this point is the relationship between war-dead and the
coding of conflict. A popular form of data about armed conflict is the
conflict-year format, where conflict is given as either present or absent in a
country. Conflict is, however, indicated by facts and events that must be
observed in themselves. Determining when a conflict starts or ends, for
instance ...

> ...

In addition, determining what facts are not relevant, and should not be
included with the aggregate, is also an important assumption that affects
further analysis. A very salient dimension that is lost when aggregating from
conflict-event to country-year is the spatial dimension. This makes it
impossible to include spatial factors such as terrain, population density, and
the presence of natural resources in analyses.

Finally, an important data attribute that is propagated from disaggregate to
aggregate data is data quality. Data quality, which is discussed at length in
the following chapter, is absolutely necessary for making valid scientific
inferences from the data. The assumption of data quality entails a great deal
of trust in the data makers, as data quality is very difficult to maintain,
requiring great thoroughness and skill. In addition, while the coding
procedures for producing the aggregate data might be available, the procedures
used for gathering the constituent data might not be. This makes it impossible
to audit the quality of the resulting data, thus making further analysis
a "leap of faith". 

The more granular descriptive event data is more theoretically neutral, and
less inherently biased. Furthermore, if the data is produced using open,
objective decision rules, the remaining assumptions can be scrutinized. Thus,
it is possible to make informed decisions about what assumptions are
acceptable, and to what degree the data used can be trusted, by following the
"audit trail" from conflict state to conflict events.

## The cost of data 

A recurring theme in writing about event data is cost [lots of references].
Producing quality data is a substantial task. This is especially true in the
case of event data, which requires careful scrutiny of an impractical amount of
news sources to extract and record facts about the events.

Coding a non-trivial amount of data is an expensive enterprise, requiring great
investments of time and effort. In addition, inherent challenges in producing
useful data are made much more difficult by the fact that the process is slow. 

For this reason, while using event data is preferable in many cases, it is
often unfeasible due to sheer amount of work required to produce quality event
data. This is the motivation behind the work presented in this thesis; i hope
to show how computerization can make the production of event data more feasible
to more researchers, thereby also facilitating their adoption and use in analyses.
 
## Summary

A prerequisite of knowledge is proper description. The intriguing phenomenon of
ceasefires, which has not yet been sufficiently studied, should be approached
first by producing systematic data about observations of its instances.
A ceasefire is conceptualized as a state, indicated by several interrelated
events. The conspicuous declaration events that mark the beginning and end of
a ceasefire are a natural starting point when collecting data on ceasefires. 

Ceasefires are interesting because of the way they might relate to a state of
war. The study of war through the study of separate events might allow
researchers to accurately show how ceasefires affect the flow of conflict,
especially in the case of localized ceasefires.  

While event data holds great promise, as described, it has historically "been
bypassed in favor of simpler methods", in part due to the "difficulty of
generating large amounts of high quality data" [@bond_integrated_2003 p.733].
Event data are shown to increase the chance of understanding the complex
dynamics of conflict situations, while also migitating, or at least making
explicit the bias in the data collection and aggregation processes.

While i argue that there are compelling reasons to use event data for analysis,
practical concerns have inhibited their production and adoption in the research
community. In this thesis, i argue that these these concerns can be adressed by
the application of computer coding.

In the next chapter, I describe in detail the process of gathering data, aiming
to establish a formal foundation on with which i can explain how computer
classification relates to scientific coding.

